Israel declares war on Hamas and orders
a total Siege of Gaza with no food or
electricity after an unprecedented
attack by the Palestinian armed group
the Israeli Prime Minister has vowed to
destroy hamas's capabilities but at what
cost and is there a risk the war could
spill over to the region this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm FIB
batibo Israel's defense minister has
ordered a Complete Siege of Gaza he says
Palestinians in The Enclave will soon
have no access to electricity food or
fuel the territory has been under
Non-Stop bombardment and hundreds of
Palestinians and Israelis have been
killed since Hamas Fighters managed to
infiltrate the Southern areas of Israel
on Saturday Hamas says the attack is a
response to more than 70 years of
occupation and a 15-year blockade of
Gaza Israel has responded by formerly
declaring war it's the most serious
escalation in decades but why exactly
did this new War start and where does it
go from here plenty to discuss with our
guests but first this report from saril
on the events of the past few
days in the early hours of October 7th
Hamas launched dozens of rockets from
Gaza into Southern
Israel the attack has been called an
unprecedented
operation the outcome of this battle is
not yet revealed to the enemy the
Israeli occupation forces have yet to
learn how massive this operation is once
they realize the severity and outcome of
it they'll regret it to our brave
Fighters across the occupied territories
you've proven that you have the resolve
this is your day to March
forward by October 8th Hezbollah joined
the
war a senior official says his Fighters
will continue to support
Palestinians our history our guns and
our Rockets are with you everything we
have is with you Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu has vowed to win the
war warning gazen residents to leave
their home
all of the places which Hamas has
deployed hiding and operating in in that
Wicked City we will turn it into an
island of ruins I'm telling gaza's
people to leave those places now because
we will take action
everywhere as October 8th came to a
close the people of Gaza had suffered
their deadliest stay in 15
years Israeli air strikes Hit The
besieged Enclave from all sides killing
nearly 300 Palestinians we are bearing
the brunt of this attack uh we have been
uh witnessing uh bombings in on
residential buildings every five minutes
uh the uh explosions are rocking uh
every place in Gaza is targeted now no
place is
safe I wish I could be a normal child
living with no war no Rockets so that we
can return home safely hundreds of
Israelis have also been killed and it's
thought that at least 100 have been
captured and taken into
Gaza as the coming October days unfold
it's unclear how and when this war might
end but the loss of innocent civilian
life will likely
continue Sara Gil for Inside
[Music]
Story well let's bring in our guests now
for today's Inside Story in ramala in
the occupied West Bank is Mustafa baruti
Secretary General of the Palestinian
national initiative in Boston is Ramy
kurri author and distinguished public
policy fellow at the American University
of Beirut and in London Daniel Levy
president of the US Middle East project
he's also former Israeli negotiator and
adviser to the office of former Israeli
Prime Minister Ehud Barak thank you all
for being on Inside Story Mr Mustafa
barotti in ramala if I can start with
you there's a lot of concern right now
about what might come next after this
surprise attack by Hamas uh Israel has
said there'll be no food no water no
electricity to Gaza because of this
attack how worried are you about what
might come next we are absolutely
worried and uh what you've just
described no water no electricity no
supplies means that Netanyahu is
conducting an act of total Collective
punishment against the Palestinian
population of Gaza against two .2
million people but more than that this
fascist government in Israel and I
insist on using the word fascist is
threatening ethnic cleansing of 2.2
million
people how could Netanyahu tell 2.2
million people living in Gaza a very
small area of no more than 140 square
miles that they should leave their homes
where should they go to he wants to
throw them in the sea where should these
people go there is no safe place at this
very moment in Gaza massacres are taking
place no less than 570 Palestinians have
been killed so far mostly and probably
100% civilians including more than 100
children and this will continue
Netanyahu promises that he will bombard
every house in Gaza how could the world
accept this I must remind you that 70%
of the people of Gaz today the 2.2
million people are refugees who were
ethnically cleansed from their land in
1948 by the Israeli troops and now they
want to ethnically cleanse them one more
time the basic question here why do we
why we are in this mainly because Israel
refuses to end its occupation mainly
because Israeli establishment refuses to
end its enslavement of the Palestinian
people in a system of aparti that is
much worse according to all human rights
organizations than the aparte system
that prevailed in South Africa at one
point of time this is a situation that
nobody can tolerate and nobody should
tolerate and instead of the United
States forcing Israel to stop these
massacres they are encouraging them to
attack more and more the Palestinian
people we'll come back to the US role in
all this in just a moment but I want to
bring in Daniel Ley into the
conversation uh Daniel the Israelis are
saying right now that this is a response
to hamas's Brazen attack on Israel a few
days ago which saw hundreds of Israelis
killed as well but how is uh a Siege of
Gaza a Complete Siege of Gaza with no
food or water to Palestinians which uh
Mr baruti rightly describ described as
collective punishment how is that going
to ensure security the security of
Israel very simply it isn't very sadly
is these are heartbreaking
pictures one's heartbreaks to see what
has happened and and and one trembles to
see what is happening now in Gaza and
what Wayne well transpire over the
coming days but the sad truth is that
that position espoused by the Israeli
leadership is precisely what got us here
and so it means they have learned
nothing and I know that these are the
most difficult days
to for those for the thinking to to be
different but the history didn't begin
three days ago and Mustafa baruti just
pointed out who who are these 2.2
million inhabitants of Gaza why are 70%
of them
refugees until Palestinians have
security Israelis will not have security
that is the equation that is the
intertwined fate of these two peoples
and if Israel thinks that there is a
military
solution then we are condemned to
reliving this kind of conversation again
and again and again but I I hope and
this may be a polanish
hope that people will begin to ask
themselves is this the only
way every day Palestinians live without
the most basic security predictability
of Life Israelis woke up to a trauma on
the weekend but they have to start
getting into their heads that if
Palestinians are going to be denied
their most basic rights you know you
have a very credible
designation that the crime of aparte is
being committed uh in terms of Israel's
rule over the Palestinians if that's the
reality in which Palestinians live then
across geography across history
people who live under those conditions
if all other avenues are closed to them
take up armed resistance and okay you
know the most frustrating thing today
Folly if I may just in one one
additional comment the most frustrating
painful thing we have been warning
policy makers for years that if every
nonviolent Avenue is closed if you're
not going to hold Israel accountable if
you're not going to challenge Israel to
change its policies at the UN at the IC
CC through sanctions with how you sell
your weapons then you are leaving only
one outlet for Change and war is the
worst thing Ramy kurri your thoughts
about what Daniel and Mustafa baruti
have said what is your reaction to this
evolving situation and what do you think
Led Led us to this point
today well I totally agree with Mr F
Daniel as usual um I will add one more
dimension I'm
B cambri near Boston in the United
States going back and forth to be in
them at least but watching the events
from here for the last couple of years
has clarified uh certain issues that I
think are really important and the the
the span of time that that Palestinians
have suffered in the way that mustan
Daniel had described um is 50 70 years
since since 1948 but it really goes back
further
than that and what happened was when the
British started in
1915 the colonial process of of stealing
Palestinian land and giving it to the
Zionist movement which was a very small
movement to make up pain that Jews felt
in Europe because of anti-Semitism and
pgms um this started a process in which
Zionism Jewish people Israel whatever
had Primacy in this land uh and
continues today and here from the West
we see the United States uh sending a
naval task force now prepared to involv
in the fighting if need be or to help uh
Israel so the the fundamental dilemma uh
which is that the Israeli Zionist
movement has never acknowledged that
Palestinians and Israelis have equal
rights that is the fundamental Point
we've acknowledged that Palestinians
have recognized it in documents and
agreements and their actions but the
Israelis have not so the the the Exile
of the Palestinians now is about 10
years longer than the ancient Exile of
the Hebrews and B Exile people fight
back before I come back to Mustafa I
just wanted to pick up on something you
said Ramy about the Americans and they
have are deploying the Americans are
deploying in the Mediterranean it's not
just sending arms to Israel as they
usually do but a employment in their
words to contain the situation but
that's going is it going to contain the
situation or is it inflaming it more
well from the American perspective is
that for me
yes the the uh from the American
perspective this is designed to send the
signal to Israel that we're with you if
you need assistance with there mostly in
terms of supplies and Logistics and
stuff but it's also from the American
View signal to Iran the American Media
and political establishment is totally
obsessed with Iran uh Iran and China are
now the threats in the world um and they
will do anything to play up that threat
and it just it's really a demonstration
of almost Mass hysteria uh and we see it
played out in the media in politics and
by the way the media coverage in the
United States also reflects something
really really terrible I I I want to to
find journalism school in the United
States I'm constantly in touch with the
top journalists in schools the way
mainstream media is covering this uh uh
situation if that was judged against the
standards that are taught in American
journalism schools they would get an F
they would be thrown out of
school okay uh let me come back to uh Mr
baruti uh on the question of the Iran
obsession that Ramy raised there some
news reports have suggested that Hamas
couldn't have pull this on its own
couldn't have done this on its own and
that it had outside help what are your
thoughts about
this and why shouldn't Hamas get help
from any country Israel is getting the
utmost help from the United States which
is providing Israel with the most
sophisticated military equipment and is
covering up for Israel for having 200
nuclear heads
uh European countries are supporting
Israel United States is supporting
Israel Israel has a an amazing network
of support all over the world so why
shouldn't Hamas get try to get support
from somebody else I think it's a it's a
very unreasonable question do you expect
this do you expect this support from
from outside countries to Hamas to
continue and to become more
visible no let me explain here there are
two issues first of all Palestinians are
not relying on anybody the big qu the
big lesson they've learned we learned
especially after the normalization of
Arab countries with Israel is that we
should only depend on ourself we should
be self-reliant we should resist with
our own abilities and that's exactly
what's happening today but on the other
hand the issue of Iran is usually is is
is is reminds us with the Israeli
Behavior always they always try to find
a country to blame and claim that
Palestinians are followers of that
country first it was the Soviet Union
then it was Egypt then it was Syria then
it was Iraq now it's Iran maybe tomorrow
it will be aeran I don't know but the
reality is that and and the other aspect
of this is that they say that they will
make peace with Saudi Arabia and with
Bahrain and with the Emirates to that's
in question it would seem this this
event and this new war might put that on
hold don't you think the normalization
with the sou absolutely yes absolutely
of course now actually one of the
reasons of what's happening today is
that Palestinians felt that their cause
is being marginalized and Netanyahu went
as far as going to the United Nations
and carrying the map of Israel including
annexed West Bank annexed Gaza and Annex
the Golan Heights as well as East
Jerusalem so the message was clear and
Netanyahu and smotrich said it no place
for Palestinian state so what do we live
in a state a situation of enslavement
let me ask you why by which law in the
world a country like Israel which is
occupying us is declaring war on
unoccupied territory it's amazing that
this is allowed to happen Netanyahu in
my opinion is a criminal he is ready to
do anything to save himself he is ready
to kill Palestinians and Israelis I know
that he's taking now the risk of killing
Israeli prisoners who are in
right why is he doing that he doesn't
care about people he cares about himself
about saving this is the most
opportunistic criminal leader ever in
the Middle East Daniel Daniel leevy let
me get your thoughts on that on the end
game here for Netanyahu and this Israeli
government I know you were on the inside
but with a previous government but you
might help us understand what the
thinking is right now in Israel what is
the end game you know with this new
conflict in Gaza is it to reoccupy Gaza
or is it more than
that with your permission F if I may
just comment on um a couple of points
raised because I think the other thing
that these events remind us is that the
Abraham Accords and the normalization
and the talks Mustafa just
referenced this is not making peace in
the Middle East because this is not
between Waring parties this is a lie
that the Americans have told themselves
and told the world and it's a problem
when you get caught up in your own lies
because you
lose eye contact you lose touch with
reality the normalization Accords don't
address what the problem is they address
something else Al
together now I think Netanyahu is
probably saying to
himself I do something spectacular I get
through this
militarily but
what Israel is faced here what we have
seen is a staggering
failure of
deterrence of intelligence and of the
military and I think it would be a
mistake if I may to
suggest that the problem is Netanyahu
his government has been focused on the
judicial overhaul you know people will
remember there were these weekly
protests against what they were pursuing
legislatively that the problem is that
they've been focused too much on the
settlers in the West Bank and they
haven't paid enough attention to Gaza
and this narrative exists in Israel I
think that's the easy go-to place but it
ignores what I think is a far more
fundamental Malay and decomposition
within the system because Israel felt
and here's where the American peace
comes in Israel felt the Palestinians
we've got them they're easy to manage
the world will let us do whatever we
want to the Palestinians they don't need
to be
seriously we we can when there are
periods of quiet we can Fritter those
away by just doing our worst never
trying to take any political initiative
because they don't even recognize the
core root problem here of Palestinian
dispossession and so the
dismissiveness the
hubris means that Israel says we've got
the most amazing surveillance systems
and they're not paying attention that
actually in asymmetric Warfare you don't
need to go toe to to Toe with your
adversary you need to be able to do
other things and America here is the
greatest empowerer enabler of that
hubris because America tells Israel we
have your back now when America goes
looking for opportunities to demonstrate
that its huis trips it up when it
invades other countries it can always
Retreat back home it's surrounded by
Mexico Canada and water when Israel
indulges in this kind of hub
it has an existential problem and I tend
to think that the days of occupation
Deluxe may be over okay let's bring uh
Ramy in on that Ramy do you agree do you
agree with what Daniel just described
there he thinks the days of occupation
may be coming to an end as a result of
this attack and the ensuing war in
Gaza yes I think it's becoming clear
that the dimensions the nature the
longevity and the meaning of of what
Hamas has just done and continues to do
there apparently still Pockets inside
Southern Israel where fighting is going
on the consequences of this are enormous
and we won't really see them for some
days or weeks uh but it's definitely
clear that uh the the nature of
Palestinian governance and docility has
been shattered the nature of Israeli uh
doctrine of military force and mowing
the grass and starving uh Palestinians
that has to come to an end because it's
backfired on them it doesn't work the
nature the idea of of Israeli
superiority and
invincibility uh has been Shattered by
the way I would suggest to American
Urban police forces who are still
looking to Israeli police training to
think twice having seen what just
happened now uh and the nature of
American and Western British and other
support for Israel and anything it wants
to do for instance blocking the ICC
investigation
that the change that has to happen is
that the
invisibility and powerlessness and
vulnerability and docility and suffering
of the Palestinian people since 1915 at
the hands of British supported and then
later American supported zist
colonialism that has to change into a
situation of a negotiated peace where
the people of Israel and the state of
Israel and the Palestinians and their
people and all the surrounding states
all live with equal rights we've made
this offer the Arabs have repeatedly
made this offer the Palestinians have
signed on to it Hamas even agreed to
Goat when he entered into negotiations
uh that's the answer is to to end the
invisibility of the Palestinians but and
let me ask you this because you talked
about this a little while ago the the
question of normalization how is this
going to play out regionally in the next
few weeks of course because we've had
some Arab countries that have
established relations with Israel the
UAE for example the biggest country in
the region Saudi Arabia was reportedly
on a path to normalize relations with
Israel that as we've said might now be
on hold but where does this leave the
other countries in the region Visa V the
Palestinian issue and the Palestinian
people when you look at Arab countries
you have to look at leaders and you have
to look people the leaders do what to do
to stay in power to make money to have
an end with Jared Kushner uh and this is
what they continue to do uh the people
of the region not just the Arab people
but Iran turkey other people of the
world if you look all over the world
public opinion support equal rights for
Palestinians and Israelis we're not
talking about throwing the Israelis out
of the Middle East we're talking about
living with the Israelis and
Palestinians with totally equal rights
and resolving the Palestine Refugee
issue which was the beginning and core
uh of of of this problem so the
normalization things that go on U are
pretty meaningless Beyond uh some uh
Stock Exchange price increases from
companies owned by people in uh
leadership positions in the Middle East
and in North America so I would not to
worry too much about it um because SCE
of what Hamas has done and the
implications that we will see coming out
of popular support for U what what
hopefully might translate into a new
political arrangement in the region that
does recognize the equal rights of
Palestinians and Israelis that that
Force which will have immense support
among Arab publics will spill over uh
into the leaderships okay Mr Musafa
baruti let me come to you now and ask
you about a point Ramy raised he said
that this these events of the past few
days will no doubt change the nature of
Palestinian governance now interestingly
we've heard very little from the
Palestinian Authority in the last few
days why is
that because uh they have had the wrong
line and they are marginalized now and
Israel also made sure to marginalize
them as much as possible and they look
irrelevant and they are now at a
crossroad either they join their people
and support the right of the
Palestinians to resist and engage in
action that would lead to Unity of
Palestinians around a program of
struggling for our rights or they will
be marginalized completely and uh I
think what we need now is Israel now is
forming a Unity government what we need
now is a unified leadership with all
Palestinians together the Palestinian
Authority should put aside not only
secur security coordination with these
occupiers but also they should put aside
uh the internal division with Hamas and
accept accept that we are all in one
unified leadership and prepare the
ground for Democratic free elections and
let the people choose the leadership
that they want I was gonna make one more
comment go ahead Daniel I think it's
important to point out FY that as we're
talking we're seeing the uh Europeans
and others threatening to cancel their
aid to the
Palestinians and and I think it's
important in that
context for people to realize
that the West on this
question is doing itself such a
disservice if it wants to be taken
seriously as a normative actor that in
other spaces talks about international
law talks about the rule of law and on
this question it's not that the rest of
the
world supports the specific action this
weekend I think when you see the images
you recoil from that just as you shudder
at what is happening to the civilians in
Gaza
but if you're going to uphold
international law if you're going to
claim that mantle you do it consistently
and that means you cannot indulge
Israel's violations every day of
international law you cannot indulge the
war crime that Netanyahu has just
promised to commit in Gaza you can't
have it both ways and you cannot
pretend that you are indifferent or be
indifferent to what has happened to the
Palestinians for day after day year
after year decade after decade thank you
so much thank you all to all three of
you for a great conversation Mustafa
baruti uh Daniel Levy Ramy corri thank
you all very much once again for joining
us for this discussion on inside story
today and thank you too for watching you
can always watch this program again
anytime by visiting our website at
aljazeera.com for further discussion go
to our Facebook page that's facebook.com
AJ insid story and of course you can
join the conversation on X our handle is
at AJ inside story from me fi bti boy
and the whole team here in Doha thanks
for watching bye for
now